Okay, so today is the 15th of October 2019. This is Dr. Adeola Dowers.
Can you say your full name for the recording?
I'm Raphael Martin.
And where were you born?
Cardiff.
And what was your date of birth?
I was born the 8th of June 1964 in St. David's Hospital.
Okay.
Riverside, that's where I come from.
Okay, all right. And we're talking today about a bit about your dad.
So he is, he qualifies as somebody who comes from the Wind First Generation.
Yeah, my father came over here in 1951 to Birmingham.
I wasn't born in.
I might look that old, but no, I wasn't born.
Where did he come from?
Oh, Jamaica.
And do you know his birth date?
My dad was born on the 19th of September 1917.
That's the beginning of the First World War.
Yeah.
Yeah, all the end of the end, yeah, start of the First World War.
He'd been 102 if he was alive today, just the other day.
Did he ever talk about what Jamaica was like?
My father died when I was 13, so I don't remember a lot.
But I remember like when there was a conversation and I was listening.
And they said they never knew what depression was till they come to this country.
I remember they said there was no depression in obviously talking about Jamaica.
So people weren't depressed in Jamaica, it just didn't happen.
They didn't know what the word meant, they were telling me.
While they were talking, you know, so I remember that.
And when they used to talk about Jamaica, because I went to Jamaica,
and I thought I went in about 2006, I think.
Yeah, 2006 I think I went to Jamaica.
And when I went to Jamaica, it was for miles per square mile.
It was more murders in Jamaica at that time, per square mile.
I think I went in February than any other country in the world at that time.
So when I went, even though it was sort of okay where I was,
it's not a nice country at that time.
And now it's not getting better.
But when my parents used to talk about Jamaica, they made it sound like it was paradise.
And I went to this place called...
What's it called?
Oh, I'm seeing this place in Jamaica.
Can't remember the name of the place right now.
If I do later, I'll let you know.
But it was so nice.
I thought, well, this is the Jamaica that my parents used to talk about.
The people were just... I think it was called Hanover.
I think it was Hanover.
And I mean, the people were just...
I mean, you know, it was just so nice.
I mean, everyone was really nice.
I remember I went in the market.
And I like haggling.
I like doing a little bit of hustling.
I think I'm a good hustler.
So I went in the shop in the market.
And there was this man.
And I wanted this...
I think it was only a map of Jamaica in a frame.
And I said, how much is that?
And he said, like, $30.
I said, no, how much is it to a Jamaican?
If you're a Jamaican.
He said, listen, if you're white, you're black, you're Jamaican, you're Chinese,
it's still $30.
You know, and I thought...
He's just saying, like, in that place, it's like it doesn't matter.
We just do things equal.
And I like that.
I didn't buy it because I...
But I did like that.
So, yeah, that's all I really know about Jamaica.
Oh, no, no, obviously Jamaica.
I mean, the food is beautiful.
And things like that.
And, you know, the sea is clean.
You know, it's just...
When I went to...
When you go to Jamaica,
obviously the West Indies,
and you come back to this country,
and you eat the food,
the food tastes like cardboard.
I mean, that's one thing I noticed.
So, you know, obviously, like I remember when I was a child,
there used to be a man, his name was Green.
Mr. Green, used to call him.
Because he called everyone like their titles,
like Mr., Mrs.
You never used first names when I was a child.
And you had to...
Obviously, you had to respect people.
Good morning.
You know, Mr. This or Mr. That.
It's not like slack like it is today.
But anyway, he used to come and visit,
not just us, but the West Indian people.
And he used to sell the proper West Indian food.
The yam, you know, green bananas,
the ackee, the saltfish.
People didn't know what that was in them days.
People do now.
So, I used to like...
We had the hard dough bread.
I used to like the bullet cake.
Oh, I used to love the bullet cake.
My dad used to like sugar cane.
You could buy these sugar cane drinks.
You know, things like that.
And remember that, this cocoa, chocolate.
And it was like solid, it was together.
And then you grate it and you make the chocolate drink.
But my dad died when I was 13.
So, I, you know, go back a long, long, long, long...
Not that I'm that old, old.
But I go back a long way to try and have the memories.
You know, and...
Yeah, so...
How old was your dad when he came over?
My dad was 33.
I'm like the same age as Jesus.
Started the first church in Birmingham.
And then...
And then, that was 1951.
I think my mother come 1952.
But what it was, like we were talking earlier on,
in them days, you know, they didn't...
They weren't sort of welcome at churches.
The white churches.
They were all...
Churches owned by white people,
mostly in them days.
And they, you know, kept to themselves.
Very closed shop.
You know, so when a black person come,
they taught the field like an outcast.
Even though people are supposed to be Christians.
So, it was easy then,
for black people to start churches.
Because in Jamaica, there's more churches
per square mile again
than any other country in the world in Jamaica.
More churches per square mile.
So, obviously they come here
and it's practically a Christian country,
Jamaica.
So, they come here and they still want the
fellowship and worship and do like they've done in Jamaica.
But West Indians,
when my dad had his church
in Cardiff, Antwerp, other one in Cardiff,
I noticed like they're very vibrant.
They had a lot of life.
And when a lot of people,
English people
or Welsh people, British people,
they're very stiff.
The British stiff up a lip, I suppose.
But the thing is, what's funny, I'm like that, see?
I'm like, I'm more English
than Jamaican.
I might act more like a Jamaican in my
characteristics.
But I like being quiet and calm in church
whereas West Indian people
when it comes to church time,
it's like Sister Act, they jump, they dance, they sing.
All different languages.
Because to them, they speak in tongues.
It's like speaking in English.
Whereas English people or British
people in them days,
a lot of them didn't even
accept it properly.
Even though a lot of English churches
were Pentecostal.
I remember going to the city temple
when I was really young.
I'm talking the 70s.
To me, it was like
not much different to Methodist, Baptist.
I didn't find much difference.
They talk about it was lively and this was happening.
Yeah, a lot of people might have been going
and the Spirit of God was moving.
But it never had the life
that our church had.
And I remember
I spoke to this lady.
I used to be a youth manager
at the Beacon Centre.
There was a lady there and her son was
in a bit of trouble so I used to go over and talk
to the people sometimes.
I was talking to this lady and then
she actually said,
she used to go to my dad's church.
My dad's church was in Welles Street.
So I thought to myself,
let me ask this white lady what it was like.
Because there wasn't loads of white people in our church.
So I thought
to myself, let me ask her what she thought about it.
So I said, what did you think of it?
I thought it was good on holiday.
Because obviously
women especially
I think they like dancing and moving
and our church was sort of like that.
So yeah,
nowadays people try and make church
entertaining.
And I don't think church should be entertaining.
I think church should be so warm.
It should be so welcoming.
It should be the place that people want to go
because they know that
God is there.
I mean
for me as a Christian, I believe
it's God who gives us life. It's like your parents
they give you life.
And I think you should respect them because they're your parents.
And I think it's the same with God
because he gives us life.
We should show respect
women in his house and do everything we can
to get to know him.
So how
challenging was it for your father
to open a church? He said that at that time
it was
for people who weren't white
to open churches.
But was it an easy process?
Well, listen
this is all I know because I
obviously wasn't born when they did
their churches.
But my dad, he had the first black Pentecostal
church in Wales.
And
like why I say it was easy
was my father
he always had big houses
so my dad must have been okay back
and over here
when the West Indians came here
they put them as laborers, they wouldn't give them their titles
my dad was a stonemason
and I remember I said to my mother
one day I said
mom, how did dad buy his first house?
You know, just ask that question.
And she said
she was Jewish
I didn't know my mother was Jewish until this day
so she said
what happened? Your dad wanted to buy this house
but in them days they wanted to sell houses
to black people and stuff, they were very funny.
So my father wanted to buy this house
and they wouldn't
they wanted to sell him the house
and the man was Jewish
and my dad said to the man, he said my wife is Jewish
so that's
how my dad was able to buy his first house.
And then
I said to my mom, I said well
obviously why did dad lie?
Because I didn't know.
And she said well she's Jewish, that's why I found out we were Jewish.
And the original Jewish people
they're black anyway, they're dark.
So you didn't know your mom was Jewish all the time?
My mother never ever mentioned that she was Jewish
because she was really humble, really calm
and very loving
and I thought all women were like that.
But anyway
yeah, no, she never mentioned it
I suppose she never
needed to.
I think a lot of people in them days didn't realize
that the Jewish people
were sort of set apart by God
I don't think that black people
really want to acknowledge that.
God chose the Jewish people
and he's put a special anointing on the Jewish people
I believe
and at the end time when Jesus
comes back, he's going to be
dealing with the Jewish people.
And the
Bible calls it
the time of the Gentiles will be fulfilled
there's going to be a time I believe
when God says, okay, the Gentiles
the non-Jewish people have had their time.
You know, and because
first salvation was for the Jews
and then the non-Jews
come in and the non-Jews
they were happy to receive it because
really God is here for everybody
He's not here for the Jews, He's not here
for the blacks, He's not here for the whites, He's here for everybody
and He always has been
you know, and
but He used the line
like He used it to Christians
to let people see Him.
So because the Jews were out of order
and doing all wrong and sort of going off track
there was a time when God
knew like, you know
it just had to be for everybody
and now we're in a time for everybody.
So, like my parents
when they come here as black people
loving Jesus, you know
a lot of people talk about God but obviously
Jesus. And
the people
who are from the West Indies, they used to come to our big houses
my dad always had big houses
and because they used to stay there
because a lot of people used to stay in people's houses
so it was easy. So a lot of people knew my parents
like when I was younger
I felt like we knew everybody
you know, I thought there wouldn't be
a black person that we don't know.
Like my dad I remember
used to drive thinking down the
docks, we used to go up the valleys
there's a story
that I
found out in the last say
ten years. Because I used to go
to this church in Murfittidville
and there was a man
the church I used to go, God sent me to the church
God said you need to go to this church
so I ended up going to the church in Murfitt
Anyway, I got to this church in Murfitt
and the man who was preaching
in this church, I thought
I'm sure I've seen this man before
Now my dad died when I was 13, right?
So these people I would have known if I knew them
when I was really young. So anyways
I started talking to this man and he said
I used to go to your dad's church
So, so when we were talking
and I go over his house, I meet him
and then he introduced me to his brother
So I'm speaking to his brother
The mother is still alive, she must be about 100
So I'm speaking to the brother
and the brother says, I want to tell you something
He said I was a sexton
I don't know what that was, but that's
someone who works in the cemetery, I think
who looks after the graves and all that, I think that's a sexton
And he said after
the
the Abba
Abba Van is it, the landslide
So your dad, he came up and he was praying and everything
here
and he said, and then he was at the
cemetery at the graveyard
and he said, and we were talking
and he said to me, do you want to
live at home? So I said
yes
So he said
I ended up going back to your parents house
having fellowship, having prayer meeting
He said, but then at some point your dad
brought you people
up to, whatever he was
I don't know if I should say Murfa, whatever it was
and he said
you're all black, all your
children come out the van and everyone was looking
like who are they, because they've never really seen black people before
You know, you're
in stories like that
Yeah, I remember that
I remember when I was a child, we used to go
to different places in the valleys and
everything, and I used to think
these people are strange, they used to keep chickens out
of their back gardens and all things like that
I remember that, you know
I wish I would have listened more
because I wasn't interested obviously as a child
you're not interested in what big people are talking about
but I wish I would have really listened
and sort of learned more
about their culture, where they come from
and things, you know
because Wales is so known for
Christianity, for revival
Was your mother from Jamaica as well?
My mother was born in Jamaica, but my mother is
Jewish by birth, because it comes down to the woman side
which means I'm Jewish by birth
I'm not Jewish at all, but
I'm Jewish by birth
It sort of helps you
if you go to the synagogue or if you go to Israel
because when you say you're Jewish, they don't care
you could be green
you say you're Jewish and all of a sudden you're part of their family
It's like when I was a child
when I was in the church
with the black people, black people
accept you as family, you know
when I was a child you go to the houses
and they feed you, you know
they look after you, it's just
I mean, yeah, some of the white people were like that
but with a black person
that's just the way it was
you know, if you're black and somebody comes in
you feed them, you know
that's what I remember
You said that your father came over first
and then your mother came over
Do you have brothers and sisters? Did they have children?
in Jamaica before they came with her?
I've got two sisters that are born in Jamaica
one just died last year
in November, we buried her in December
my oldest sister, she's
alive now, she's in her
late sixties
they were the only two born in Jamaica
and like I said
I've visited, my young brothers visited
a few of us have visited
Jamaica because
I mean, I don't know, it's strange
when I was a child I actually
got a Jamaican passport
I got a Jamaican passport
now the reason I've done that is because I used to be
the police used to give me so much trouble
and everybody used to sort of
give me trouble
because when you're black, you know
in them days, it wasn't
you were different
you was different because you're in a class
of 30 people and you're the only black person
just saying
so I felt so uncomfortable
I felt so out of place, I thought
if I get a Jamaican passport when people are rude
and cheeky to me, at least I'll know I'm not
a Welsh person, British person
I used to just feel like that
everybody has their thing and that was my thing to help me cope
because you've got to cope with things
either you're going to kill people or they're going to kill you
because I'm
was never the sort of person
to sit down
and take rubbish, I don't
never have taken rubbish, I don't take rubbish
because my parents
used to teach me, everybody's the same
doesn't matter if you're white, red, yellow
it makes no difference, you're all the same, God made everybody equal
and then I'd go outside the house
and then I'd speak all the words
all these names
I don't even think they're
in the dictionary
some of the names they used to call me
so I used to be mad
and it made me angry
and I just wouldn't take rubbish
so I used to think to myself, if you want
to think you can be cheeky to me
you better be able to fight me
because I'm going to beat you
I used to think like that, so when I was younger
I used to have a lot of problems in school
I used to have a lot of trouble
and thank God
I've had problems, like my dad
come and speak to the headmaster
because I used to
I mean it's terrible, I used to get caned every day
I don't think a day
ever went by
from when I couldn't remember going to school
until I was about 14
without getting the cane
I got caned every single day
because I was always the fault
if I would get jumped by 3 people, 4 people
I would always end up getting caned
but when I got older, when I was about 14
I used to be able to beat people so bad
that they couldn't cane me no more
so I never got caned from when I was about 14
because I used to beat the people so bad
that I'd say, I remembered
if there's trouble
the other person has got to get in trouble too
so they used to be so bad
they couldn't do nothing
because I used to say, what about them
if you're going to cane me, you've got to cane them
so I should laugh anyway
but that's why I stopped getting caned
so when I was 14 I got caned again
so basically, that just sounds really
unjust, doesn't it?
you were picked on
and attacked
and beaten
by the headmaster or whatever
that doesn't make any sense, does it?
but that's the system
it's strange
I see it like this, as I'm talking to you now
you have a mother, not all mothers
but most mothers
them children can do no wrong
so because the white people
were their children, their children
can do no wrong
I used to feel like they used to try and beat me
or cause me problems
because I was a net child
I was different
apparently a friend of mine told me
he said to me, I found out this
this year I think I found this out
he said that the teachers were so worried about me
so frightened of me
they used to ask the other children, can any of them fight me
so they can come in the classroom with me
and if I cause trouble they can keep me camp
that's what the teachers used to ask the pupils
I found out this year
how does that make you feel?
well it's funny, because I look back
when I was younger and I was wild
I didn't care, that was just how it was
but when I look back I just think
it was real child abuse
because if you hurt a child now
the parent will go to prison
but yet I was a child
just like everybody else
but I was black
and I used to get all beaten and all trouble
all things just happened to me
I was black
I remember once I was walking
through Sapphire Gardens
that's in Riverside where I lived
and I was walking home and I was with one of my friends
and he was back in and out of prison
he was a rough guy
and we were walking and there was
two police, police come up in a car
they come out the car
and I said to my friend, I said I'm not stopping
because you know I'm going to get in trouble
so he stopped and I just walked off
and anyway they just called me back
and I was walking and my friend was a criminal
and then they picked on me
and he put his hands in my pocket
and squeezed me
so I punched him I did, the policeman
and then he, you know I automatically
didn't, well anyway
because I don't take burbish anyway
so he took me home to my mother
and then you know and then I
that's I didn't get any trouble for it
because he probably knew what he'd done
and as I say I just got in trouble
with my mum then but
I was good, you know, because I never done nothing
you know and things like that
I mean that's just one, I mean I've been
I remember I got
pulled over, obviously my car
plenty of times, I used to drive
stopped, harassed
I remember once
and this was in the last say eight years
I was
I dropped off my cousin in Lamarmy
and I was driving to
back to St Melan's
and then the police, I see them follow me
they follow me to Lamarmy
and then they see me
drop off my cousin and then they follow me
I was with my ex
they follow me back
to the house and then
they pulled up behind me, obviously they knew where I was
it wasn't that long ago, they checked the number plate and everything
but I was in a bad mood because they followed me
and I was just really angry
so
they come out the car because I always
I used to keep my documents with me
but anyway
so they said to me
I've got your documents
and I was in such a bad mood I said
no I haven't got my documents, just give me a producer
so he looked at me
this police man, he must have seen me in real world
went round the producer and just went
you know that was good
I was in a bad mood
because we're human at the end of the day
when we get
because when we're young
we don't really understand racism
a lot, I don't think, you know, how deep it is
and how bad it is because
we might just think
I don't know, it's just like we don't
think deep, I didn't think, I want to think
I never thought, but when I got older
and I started, like I said, I thought
when they picked on me and gave me
trouble when I was a child
that's the same as picking on a little white child
but because I was black they didn't
care, they treated me like I was an animal
so when I look back and I think how can an adult
how can I be an adult and want to
be through or cause trouble until like 8
6 year old, 6 year old, so because my mind
thinks different now
it's different now when I get stopped or when someone
says something to me, you know, I'll think to myself
why is he saying that?
what's the reason behind that?
I got married, I had a family
I was in London and in London
they understand the program
there's areas where there's black love, black
people, black white, they mix
and it's not too bad, in certain areas they understand
so I come
back to Cardiff and when I come back to Cardiff
got saved, come to Cardiff
and then my wife wasn't well
and I went to social services
the next thing I know they take my children off me
I went to them for help and they take
my children off me and until this
day I still haven't gotten back
so I made
complaints, they found social services
done wrong, but they still let
them keep my children, they even
when I went to social services, when I went
there in 1998
you know there was no black people in the social
services where I was
in St Melons, so I made a complaint
and then I said to them
I want to go with this black guy, there was one black
social worker and you know they waited
until the court case was finished
before they'd even look
into it and then they said no, I'm not moving you
over there, it was really bad, they gave me a lot of trouble
I mean this government, this
I mean you get people out of OK
but the system is very
very very racist
even today, not
long ago I was talking to one of my friends
my white friends and he said to me
he said you know they're still racist, a lot
of racism, he said you know we don't say it to your face
but we're still you know
so even though it doesn't seem
as bad and the only reason
it doesn't seem as bad I believe
is because they're catering
for everybody, you see these homosexuals
they could cater for
homosexuals, bisexuals,
transgender, all this sort of stuff
they cater for anything
they don't care, you can be anything now
and because of that they know they've got to be OK with black people
if it wasn't for these like all these
feminist movements
or the be good to dogs
if it wasn't for all that, they'd still be
treating black people like animals
because you know people are still people
it's just like now they know they've got to watch
themselves because you say boo
to a black man and it'll get you over racism
now, so that's where
we are now, but I've moved a long way haven't I
really
so what I'll do
what I'll do, let me go back
to what it was like in the church
and I thought you know let me go back to some of that
I'll go back to some of that
so when I was a child I remember like my parents
used to wake us up in the mornings
and we used to have to praise God
and pray and all that before we went to school
before we'd done anything
my parents they were very very
religious
you know, Christians, proper, I mean
proper, on Sunday I mean
that's just it man, you don't watch
anything TV, no, we're just all
pure Jesus
from day start
to day night, you know
and my mother she used to tell me
sometimes we'd go to church when we were babies
and we'd fall asleep in our arms and stuff like that
because the whole day, Sunday
is church day, you know
and it was like that and
I remember
you know
we had to read the Bible
we had to learn the Lord's Prayer
and the 23rd Psalms
and
our parents always taught us like
you be good, you do right
you don't steal, you don't cheat, I don't swear
I've only swore about maybe five times in my life
the first time I ever swore was telling
a joke
and my friend said to me, why did you swear? I said that's the joke
isn't it? You know it's like really weird
you know so
but it was funny because when I was a child
I used to think white people were strange
and because I used to go to my friend's house
and they all, they drink, they smoke, they swear
they do what people do
so I think white people are strange
and then when I got older and I became a Christian
I realised it wasn't so much white people that were strange
it was because we were Christians
brought up strict a certain way
so we were probably strange to everybody else
and I'm thinking, oh them white people they're strange
how can they swear and smoke
why would they take cigarettes in their mums and stuff
you know I couldn't understand
so it was really funny when I looked back on it
you know but I have obviously
you know as a Christian
and as a person you know I
I do realise
you know people are people
it's just like you know I think
in my generation
we were treated bad and the government
allowed us to be treated
bad and I think that's a big difference
now but
you know I mean I've spoken to some
people and you know white people
and you can see they see no difference
I used to find it strange
you know when I moved to London
and I come back and
because in Cardiff
people always, when I was here
white people always seemed to talk down to me
but then when I got obviously
I was older and I come back to Cardiff in 1998
I realised people
really
were talking to me like I was a normal human being
and I was sort of, you know I had to get used to that
you know because when I was younger
I was always used to being talked down to
so what is that then? Why was that
change happening?
Well I think obviously I was
older because I was only about 18
when I left Cardiff
I left in 1983, 84
18, 19
it was more racist
it was much more racist, much more prejudice
but now you've got like I said
you can beat whatever, in fact
if you're
a transgender you probably
get more respect than a black man
you know because
there's fashions in it, it's just strange
and you know people are people
and I've got nothing against people
I do personally think some things are wrong
but I think
we can do wrong because
God will never
say, well he won't
kill us for doing wrong really, it's just like when we die
we have to answer for what we do
but you know people are people and we've got to
understand, I think to myself
why should I, or why should black people
I'm just talking now
why should black people
treat white people bad when we
black people know what it's like to be treated
bad, I'm like that, I think like you know we need
to treat everyone with respect and love don't we
that's just how we should be
you know
Tell me about the Jamaican
identity then, because when you were little
you had a Jamaican passport because you didn't feel
like you fitted in and you know
understandably so, where are
you now with that?
well it's funny right
because I
because Jamaican our motto
is, I don't know if it's for you
because you're from the West Indian Islands
Jamaica is out of many one people
and I like that
you see really we
I mean it's hard to find a
proper white person I would say in it because everything
is mixed, I remember I was living in London
and one of my friends said to me, he said listen
this is the colour of the future man
this is the colour of the future
and I said what do you mean? He said listen when is everyone going to be like this?
this was in the 80s
and I
thought come on, come on, it sounds good
but now I can see it because
you know I mean
it's good to mix, I think my father
I was speaking to
at the funeral, I was at the funeral and there was this
one of the white guys who used to go to our church
and he said you see your father
was into people mixing
he understood the importance
and he said he helped us when we were younger
these white people he said he helped us start a business
he said I'll never forget that you know
I'll be grateful for that because the business is still going
you know and obviously that would have been in the 70s
but he said yeah
he was very equal you know like my mother
she's Jewish
so my mother
was olive skin
so and my father is about my colour, I'm one of the darkest
in my family you know which was
strange because
in this country I feel like I was
brainwashed, I went to school
and you know I never ever went out with
a black girl until I was
leaving to move
to London and I went out with a very very
light mixed-race girl because I didn't like
black people you know, didn't like black people
because I was brainwashed
it's really strange you know
to, because when
there's white girls who only, I'm talking from
a man's point of view, a black man
there's white girls who only like black guys
and I used to, when they used to
talk to me, I used to find out
I used to think, you're strange, why don't you like
your own people, why don't you like white people
oh and they say all this about this and this, all
sillyness you know, but I was the same
without realising you know because
I was just brainwashed, I was in school
somehow they taught me that black people
had big noses, big lips
and were ugly and looked like monkeys
you know I just learnt that from school
somehow and
it's strange because I don't remember ever
sitting in a class and them telling
me that, but I know I learnt it from school
you know and so I
was sort of prejudice
or racist I suppose
towards my own people
I guess it would have been hard as well because if you're one in a class
of 30 you're the only black person
and you don't really have much options do you
in terms of liking a black girl
or whatever, you didn't have that option in school
besides the fact that it was compounded
with the racism of we're ugly
and we're this and we're that and wanting to escape
it in some way
I suppose so, I'm really surrounded by it
well I remember talking to one of my friends
he's a year younger than me
but his brother is a couple of years older than me
and he said, my brother
the older one, he said
he put bleach in a bath and jumped in a bath
and bleached, tried to be white
you know it was really hard in
them times
people don't understand because
I'm the first generation born here
my father was from Jamaica
like the Windrush generation you say
we were the first born here
and it's strange
because you had what you call the Docs
and them Docs people were mostly
they were there for quite a long time
and they were actually born here
their parents were born here, they were Dockers
they came here for years, but as
we come in the Windrush generation
and when we come
to Jamaicans, Jamaican people
they were nice people, but Jamaican
everyone knows Jamaican don't take rubbish
so when you're trying to tell a Jamaican
you're this, you're that, it's not easy for us
so there would be a lot of problems
because we don't like being pushed around
I don't like being pushed around
it's in my DNA
I can't be pushed around
I was a bit different to my brothers
and the people I went to school with
because the people I went to school with
they don't mind being pushed around
but I couldn't
it just wouldn't happen with me
there was something in me which told me
I'm the same as you, who do you think you are
and if you can fight me
I'll respect you, but if you can't fight me
that's it
Do you think there was a culture
you mentioned Butown and the kind of
the people that came from the 1800s
and how it was a settled
community in that sense
but do you think there was a culture of
acceptance
of being ill treated
or being ostracised
in Cardiff I suppose
and that
didn't sit well with the new migrants
well this is what I know
the Docks people when I grew up
they had their own little army
they were very close, they all knew each other
they all seemed to support each other
but I didn't live there
but I never used to go down there except when my dad would take me
in a van when he'd ask people to come to church
it's funny
for me when I was a child
I used to fight a lot, but we had an unwritten
rule, it was like if you see a black man in trouble
you help him
because there wasn't many of us
like we were saying earlier on
and that's
sort of how it was
but I don't
it's funny because like I said it seemed like
my parents
generation, them ones, and my dad
was a minister and they seemed to be able
to go anywhere and be okay with
other sort of black people and stuff
but us, the first ones born here
I found it
strange
when I was younger
it was funny because
we had light skin
so when I was younger
the white people wouldn't really accept you
just because you're black, any colour black
and then the black, dark, dark people
they weren't too cool with you neither
because you were in between in them days
in Jamaica they called us red skin
I mean
it was just strange
but then you're told like
if you've got any colour
you're black
so you've got to be a black person
but some of the blacks are not cool
it's just really weird, it's just strange
but anyway, I don't think a black person
would beat you up
just because you were light the colour of skin
a white man would want to string you up
just because you've got any tiny bit of colour
and some white people
they can see black, even when
you can't see black
but I know
it always happens
so the history with Butown
you didn't really have a relationship with Butown then?
not until I was
like a teenager
because there was some
in my school
but when I was in school I think there might have been
two black people in the A band
except for Fitz Allen
when I went to Fitz Allen
there was 2000 people
and just say
maybe 75
if that
were black
like Indians or whatever
and now if you go to Fitz Allen
the roles reversed
I mean it's strange
because obviously I've got children
even my children
they tell me they
have experienced racism and stuff
I've got children lighter again because my wife was white and stuff
so I mean it's just
a system
I don't really think it'll ever
change
because
I don't think it'll change
there are people who
like the white race
they sort of feel like they're superior than they
I mean they just do
even now
you know they
I mean
they still don't
see black people as on like an even
path today they just don't
it's just the system even though we'll get better
and better
I won't be surprised if there's Muslim one day
in this country
which obviously I'm not really
into but
I just think I wish that people could
just live and support
each other as equals
that is
I hear what you're saying there
what are the coping mechanisms then
in a system that seems to
inherently be against you?
What are the coping mechanisms for us and for our children?
Well I stay
away as much as I can
from authorities
you know because I just
I mean what's the point I mean
I don't like going places because as soon as I
think to myself they see a black face and that's it
and I suppose this is all ingrained
from years ago you know because
obviously it's not all bad
it's not there's such a change
I mean you've got the
the black
is it Emmy what do they call them?
the member, no the mayor
the member of the
AM that's what they are here in Wales
isn't it? Yeah
assembly member, yeah you've got him
I went to him before
for help he didn't do much for me but I suppose
it's because he's got white people around
him you know and no matter what happens
we're in a bad
black people
we're the underdogs no matter what happens
anyway yeah so that's the coping
mechanisms you stay away I just stay away as
much as possible and try and be in the background
and just not be in anyone's
face you know
and you've got to trust God as a Christian
you know and
you know because I mean it's funny because
I mean the Christian circle is
slightly different
because slightly
different nowadays because people realize
you know that black
people we Christians we carry something
like the Jewish people had something
in their day the black people the African
race
they're very spiritual and people know
that you know so in
the Christian circles now it seems like
the black people are sort of taken
over a bit because we have got
I mean even in the city church which used to
be the city temple
they've got
I think they've got like a South
American I think he's got colour
pastor now and they got like a
youth pastor Ricardo who was a black
guy he was the first black guy probably there
and I think to myself well you know
yeah cool you know so something's
happening you know and
yeah I mean for me I just
think to myself personally
you know as a Christian you either
trust God or what's the point like you know
you know because really
I mean I don't know I mean life is strange
in it I mean you wake up you
eat at breakfast like you
asked me about breakfast you
go to work you know you can
marry you have children and
it's just a circle in it life is just a circle
and you know if
you're born into maybe a rich family
you know you might have money but it
doesn't mean you're going to be happy
and whether you're rich
or poor one day you're
not going to be here no more
so I just realized like
you know if I'm not here
and then when I'm not here my
spirit is going to live forever I need it
to be living in the right place
and I know that's with Jesus you know and
and that's
not just because of my culture because I was brought up
Christian see some people might think
it's because oh he's brought up Christian
no it's because
I met Jesus he spoke to me
and I become a Christian
You grew up as a Christian then didn't
there was a period where you went
yeah I grew up in a Christian household
but I wasn't a Christian
you know I used to always repent
and give my heart to the Lord because I knew I was
a wicked person and I knew
I was a bad person and I wanted to
be safe from one week to the next
so every time I knew all the bad things I'd done
so I'd go to the front
and I'd say Lord forgive me
and I hoped that it lasted a week
I was just really bad you know because
if you do wrong you've got to pay for that
in this world or the next I mean if you
do something wrong
in this life like if you steal and you get
caught you're going to get in trouble
you know if you fight and you get caught you're going to get in trouble
anything you do
that's wrong and you get caught
you can face the consequence
so this life we live I knew
I was doing wrong you know and
so I just said
I'm sorry and ask for forgiveness
but then Jesus spoke to me and I was in
a club and then I became a Christian
and when I became a Christian I realized
then this Jesus
who
2000 years ago they said died
died and then raised
from the dead and spoke to his disciples
he's the same one who spoke to me
and he speaks to people and I believe that
so I know
like it's not because
I was brought up as a Christian
that helped me and I was a foundation and I thank
God for that
you know but it's because
I met Jesus myself I'm a Christian because
I know Jesus myself
I'm not a Christian because my parents
in the Welsh revival when God visited
Wales in 1904
there was a saying might have been
before that but it was a saying which said
God has no grandchildren
you got to know God for yourself
that's what that means I didn't know that but that's what it means
so I know God I know Jesus for myself
so I'm not like a Muslim who
trusts that his grandfather
great grandad or whatever
you know was a Muslim
so he's a Muslim or a Hindu
who just follows Gods because
they've been there they make the rain they do
this they do that no no I don't I'm the
sort of person where it's got to be
real you know so
if you're in front of me and I can see you
I know you're real but
don't tell me about your sister
because I don't
know if she's real or if you're making her up it's
got to be real to me I'm that sort of person
even though people think I'm crazy
which is okay I don't mind that
you know because it's okay
you know because I because this
crazy person when he dies he's going to be with Jesus
so I don't care don't bother me
yeah I think it is challenging being
spiritual in
this day and age
well I think it's I think
it's actually not so bad now and I tell
you why because anything goes people
anything goes except Christianity
which is really strange you know because
in the old days when you thought about Jesus
they appeared in a madhouse
yeah but they are
called religious mania I think
they used to call it
if you go back in the old days the proper
born again Christians used to love Jesus
they used to burn them as witches and things like that
so people have always done strange
things but nowadays it's cool
to an extent to be a Muslim
it's cool to be a Buddhist I think Buddhists are quite
cool anyway because they just go round in
circles and they do good usually
if I was going to be any religion I'd be a Buddhist
because Buddhists I don't think hurt people
even some Hindus
they just come back and they do good you know
I mean I'm into that
but Jesus is real
which is the difference
so it doesn't matter what anyone is
or what they know man
I want to follow I will only follow
what's real you know only
so if I was brought up a Muslim
or a Hindu or Buddhist
or whatever I'm the sort of person
would want to know what's real
why do I have to follow something
that's not real I need to have the reality
give me the real and I'm cool
if someone says they're going to slap me I wouldn't believe
until they hit me I'm not the sort of person
worse than Dalton Thomas I am
you know
so I'm thinking okay so your father passed away when you were 13
yeah
I'm thinking about a scenario now
of this man from Jamaica coming over
and his wife following him
that's what they used to do apparently
when the man comes first and the lady
comes after I think they used to come
and they used to prepare the way
to make it easier that's what real men do
I suppose make sure that the wives are okay
that's what they used to do
because everything's changed
the world's gone upside down
if my dad
woke up from the grave
he wouldn't
think he was
he wouldn't think that he was in Wales
because we found such a change
everything changes but like wow
I mean my dad's been dead
about 30 years
30 years
he wouldn't recognise
this country
there's such a change
could be good could be bad
a lot of good things have happened
we've got the Millennium Stadium there's a lot of people
coming to Cardiff now and Cardiff
is on the map in it
so that's good
but it's such a change
what advice would you give to young
well I guess you kind of answered this already
when I talked about coping mechanisms
but what advice would you give to young people now
in terms of
where to go
well I would say
if I had to live my life over again
first of all
when I got saved I wished I was a Christian earlier
that would be my main
so I would say to a person
it's good to seek out
in your life
where you're going to be in the next life
what's real to you
what's your calling why are you here
and it's important for a person
to study hard
be good to people
get on with people
because even though everybody goes through struggles
there are a lot of opportunities now
which wasn't around in my day
we're living in an age
where you can be anything you want
and in fact the more bizarre you are
the more people will accept you
so I would tell a person
be true to who you are
be the person God has called you to be
and always
search
for the creator
I would say Jesus obviously
but that's the advice I would give somebody I suppose
your colour doesn't have to be a hindrance anymore
in a lot of ways
it can be an advantage
especially if you're a black person speaking Welsh
because there's a lot of opportunities
so yeah just study
study hard, like my children, I hope they study hard
and just be faithful to God
and try not to
have too many different partners
just try and wait for the right person
save yourself, that's what I would say
In terms of these stories and these histories
so you know that we're connecting the stories
of the Wendrush generation
and all these people telling us about
what it was like back home and what it's been like here
and how they kind of like
navigate that sense of belonging
feeling Jamaican
feeling British
how do you make sense of the two and all of that
how important do you think these stories are
for the next generation
and the generation after that, do you think it's relevant?
I think it's really really relevant
because the thing is
I wish now
that I would have sat down with my dad
or my dad would have sat down and talked to me
and talked to me about what it was like
because my dad's generations
most of them
didn't pass on a lot of information
I think there's a lot of
illegitimacy
is that it's by when you have like a lot of people
I think in
I'd say the West Indian culture
and I'd say a lot of people
got family that they don't know about
and it's all been kept secret
and I think because of things like that we don't know a lot
there's a lot of things
I believe that we should know that we don't know
I think there's
I've got probably loads of
cousins and stuff
and family that I don't even know about
and I wish I did know about because family
is everything really in this world
it's about family
and sometimes we need support from family
and there's
they say blood is thicker than water
some people say yes, some people say no
but you know it's
good if you can confide in a family member
it's easier isn't it
yeah, so I guess in a way
knowing these stories
and knowing this kind of legacy kind of helps to root you
in a way?
of course, it's like my mother
like I said she's Jewish and I said to my mother
one day I wanted to go to the synagogue
because when I became a Christian
I wanted to
when I was younger I always wanted to hook up with my Jamaican roots
I wish I was born in Jamaica, I hated being born
in this country, I hated this country
you know, I was angry with my parents
why was I born here, why was I born here
and when I became a Christian I realised
oh ok, because God wants me here
to help people and I like that
but um
talk about rooting
yeah, yeah, rooting
so I was saying
yeah, so I always wanted to be Jamaican
when I was younger
because I didn't know my mother was
Jewish anyway and even if I did know
I wouldn't have acknowledged it
when I was younger because I liked the Jamaican
I liked the way they talk, I just like how they are
they're cool, you know
their music, the reggae, I love all that sort of stuff
but
then
anyway, that's it
it's very important, like my kids
I say look I'm Jewish by birth but I'm a Jamaican
you know, it's easier
it was easier for me to see myself as a Jamaican
because like I said in this country
because you're so ostracised, you feel like
other place and you
I used to hold on to something, I used to hold on to my
my Jamaican-ness
even though I never went to Jamaica until I was older
but you know
and it's funny, right?
you should say that, because the first time
I ever heard reggae music
not Bob Marley, I mean
reggae music, right?
I felt like I had a hole
and it was filled, it was really weird
people say they have that when they
get saved, when they become Christians
but it happened to me, I just felt
that there was a hole, I didn't even know
I just felt like this was filled
when I heard reggae music
and it was really strange for me
you know
and I just fell in love with reggae music then
in like the 80s
you know, when you have like
Eka Mouse, or Yellow Man
or
people stitching
all them
it was really strange
yeah, that's really touching
okay, I think we're pretty much done
is there anything else you want to say, or add?
no, I just thank you, you know
for taking your time out, you know
your organisation and
speaking to people, because it is important
I wish, like I was saying, I wish that I would have
my parents would have, my dad really would have
took me to Jamaica
when I was a child and explained things to me
and showed me around, I would have loved all that
just to have that, so I just
I mean, this is for my children
and maybe people who are interested, and at least
I think they know, I thank God for that
okay